Well, it's 3:00 in the morning and I'm
sorry to report, but the verdict is in
for the Jehovah's Witnesses versus
Norway. Something I've been covering on
this channel extensively for the last
four years or so. And we finally have
the verdict in the Supreme Court. So,
let's talk about it real quick.
decisions to deny state subsidies and
registration to Jehovah's Witnesses are
invalid.
The case concerns the validity of five
decisions to refuse state subsidies and
one decision to dregister Jehovah's
Witnesses as a religious community as
well as the refusal of new registration.
The state was of the opinion that the
religious community's practice of social
exclusion violates children's rights and
the members right to free withdrawal cf
section six of the religious communities
act and article 9 of the European
convention of human rights. The Supreme
Court explained the the organization and
teachings of Jehovah's Witnesses,
including the practice of
dysfellowshipping and social exclusion
of former members and the legal
framework under the Religious
Communities Act and the Freedom of
Religion under the ECR.
The court emphasized that the threshold
for refusing state subsidies and
registration is high and that the
provisions of section 6 must be
interpreted in light of among other
things the religious community's
autonomy under article 9 of the European
Court of Human Rights. With regard to
children's rights, the Supreme Court
unanimously found that the state had not
aduced sufficient evidence that
Jehovah's Witnesses in practice subject
underage members to psychological
violence or negative social control to
such an extent that children's legally
protected rights are violated. The court
emphasized the etern internal guidelines
for dealing with minors, that family
ties are not broken, and that no actual
extent of dysfellowshipping of children
had been documented.
That's pretty annoying. Furthermore, the
Supreme Court considered whether the
practice of social exclusion of former
members violates the members right to
free withdrawal. The court found that
Jehovah's Witnesses meet the requirement
for free and unconditional resignation
pursuant to section two of the religious
communities act. The majority of three
judges found that the practice of
exclusion does not constitute undue
pressure on the members in violation of
article 9 of the ECR.
Among other things, emphasis was placed
on the fact that the practice is rooted
in the religious community's teachings,
is known to the members when they join,
and does not involve direct pressure,
coercion, or threats.
Again, pretty annoying. The practice of
exclusion does not apply to family
members in the same household. Family
ties are not broken for family members
outside of the household. Family ties
are not broken for family members
outside the household. That is the
biggest loto malarkey I've ever heard.
The majority subsequently found that the
conditions for refusing state subsidies
and registration pursuant to section six
of the religious communities act were
not met. The decision on refusal of
grants and dregistration could therefore
not be upheld. Two judges dissented on
the questions of whether Jehovah's
Witnesses expose their members to undo
pressure to resign, thereby violating
the members right to free reg
resignation. The minority placed
particular emphasis on the fact that ex
exclusion can lead to lost contact with
family members, especially for minors.
It also emphasized that the exclusion is
the result of a rule-based order and is
intended to be tangible consequence for
the person who resigns. The minority
therefore believed that the conditions
for refusing state subsidies and
registration pursuant to section six of
the religious communities act were met.
The minority further concluded that the
decision to refuse registration was an
interference with the freedom of
religion pursuant to article 9 of the
ECR
but that the interference was justified.
The minority was of the opinion that the
decisions were not contrary to the
protection against discrimination under
article 14 of the CH ECR and the
protection of the right to property
under article 1. The judgment clarifies
the threshold for refusing state
subsidies and resignation of religious
communities and how the rules should be
assessed in relation to religious
freedom under the ECHR.
the judgment. We can see here the appeal
is rejected and they find that the
original uh claim for state state
subsidies that was denied uh that was
deemed invalid.
And so the Supreme Court rules that they
this Ministry of Children and Families
pays Jehovah's Witnesses a little over 2
million croners as well. So, the
Jehovah's Witnesses won in the Supreme
Court like they did in the Apple court
as well. And I suppose my reaction to
this is very similar to what it was
before. and that this is a legal victory
but not a moral victory which is an
important thing I suppose to understand
because Jehovah's Witnesses see
themselves as
the best most moral great honest people
on planet earth when I was a witness
that's how I saw myself people around me
that's how they talked about it that's
how we viewed ourselves and so this
doesn't represent you know the the the
country of Norway patting Jehovah's
witnesses on the back and saying, "Oh,
good on you, lads. I'm I'm real sorry
that those crazy corrupt people in the
Ministry of Children and Families were
we're giving you the shakeddown. You
know, we're really on your side." It's
not that. The world is not so black and
white. Jehovah's Witnesses have this
weird thing where they just see
everything as right and wrong. There's
no nuance to it and there's no like gray
area to anything. So obviously they're
going to be wiggling their fingers in
the air and saying that, you know, this
is a pure victory. But it's just simply
not because there's a difference between
like the state saying, "Well, we have a
really high bar set for denying state
subsidies and for you to not be able to
register religion and you got really,
really, really, really close to that
very, very high bar that we set, but you
didn't quite go over it. Uh just this
document's pretty big and I'll go over
it more tomorrow when it's not 3 in the
morning and I'm a little more fresh. Um
but from the looks of it, there were
three judges uh that voted to that it
wasn't valid and two that said no, they
should uphold it. So uh it was very
close 32. It was an actual nailbiter uh
to be completely honest with you. So it
really could have gone either way. But
it I think again it's good to understand
that this is just them saying yes you do
bad things. Yes, you do shun people.
Yes, this does demonstrate a measure of
coercion. But is it enough coercion?
Is it enough threats? Is it and have you
really violated the law sufficiently
to warrant not being able to be
registered as a religion and not receive
state subsidies? And now we have the
answer as to what the the court of
Norway thinks about that. But at the end
of the day, this is a positive. like no,
at least for me, like how I see it, I I
can't imagine looking at this as being a
a net negative because the exposure
uh that this has for Jehovah's Witnesses
in Europe in in general was massive. A
lot of people were tuning in. A lot of
people were following this. Whenever I
talked about on the channel, all of
those videos, you know, were pretty
popular. Even people that weren't
Jehovah's Witnesses would comment and
talk about it. So I think this is a very
a very important thing that happened and
it's not a net negative because that
negative exposure is so important. It's
so important to break that mold of you
know ordinary regular people just
wandering around the city thinking that
Jehovah's Witnesses are weird but not
dangerous or bad. when you get this
level of negative publicity, you start
seeing them as weird and low-key kind of
dangerous and bad. So, I think that that
is going to be um
it's it's going to have long-term
effects. And to a certain extent, at
least how I think about things, it
already has had some effects on
Jehovah's Witnesses. How many of the
recent changes were as a result of them
being like, "Man, we need to get ahead
of
um other weird, goofy little rules and
policies that we have in place like like
the blood doctrine. Hey, we need to get
ahead of this if this ever comes up
again. If this ever is going to get us
in a legal problem and we're going to
have our butts hauled back in front of a
court, let's try and get ahead of some
of these things by, you know, adjusting
some of those. Did Tony Morris get
kicked out? Because on that governing
body update, he said, "We're certainly
not going to change anything about
shunning." And then subsequently, they
kick him out and then do make some
adjustments to their shunning policy.
These are realworld
consequences, at least how I'm seeing
it, for what happened in Norway. And you
have to remember that when they do make
these changes, when these negative news
reports do come out, Jehovah's Witnesses
are seeing these. There are hundreds, if
not thousands of people that left the
organization as a direct result for
either a change that was made to the
organization because of Norway, maybe
people leaving because wait, how did
Tony Morris get kicked out and that just
led them down a rabbit hole? We don't
really know how many people that just by
the the the proceedings that happened
actually woke up from this. So again, I
don't think you can stress it enough
like this isn't Yes, it's a loss. You
know, you would love to see it them get,
you know, dregistered as a religion, not
be able to get any of their money. Not
that I really think Watchtower needs it
all that much. Just maybe it's a hot
take, but
that would have been cool. That would
have been awesome. That would have been
amazing. It's just with what
the world's standard is for having
religions have a special place in
society.
Legal battles like this are going to be
an uphill battle and they're going to
continue to be an uphill battle. But
that does not mean that they're not
worth fighting because of everything
I've just said. like it's still a net
positive and all of the people that that
put in so much hard work and you know
really dedicated a significant portion
of their life to fighting for this
should be so proud. They should really
hold their heads up so high and and and
we should be there also to support them
and tell them hey you need to hold your
head up high because this is a very good
thing that happened. exposure in a
negative way is is a pretty positive
thing in the end. So anyway, like I
said, I will get into this more tomorrow
when I'm a bit fresher. But I just
wanted to give you guys the quick
update. And uh yeah, that's about it. So
please, more than ever, stay safe, be
kind, and don't forget to spend more
time loving the things you love than
hating the things you hate. I'm going to
bed.